---

layout: post
year: 2025
day: 1
number: 1
speaker: Maria-Romina Ivan
affiliation: University of Cambridge and Stanford University
link: http://www.magd.cam.ac.uk/user/ivan
title: The Dichotomy of Poset Saturation
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->

---

Let $\mathca P$ be a finite poset. We say that a family of subsets of $[n]$ is $\mathcal P$-saturated if the family does not contain an induced copy of $\mathcal P$, but adding any other new set to the family creates such a copy. How small can such a family be? This is called the saturation number for P, denoted by $\text{sat}^*(n, \mathcal P$). It turns out that this is a misleadingly easy looking question, as so far, this question has been answered exactly for just a few precious posets. Even more intriguing is the fact that for some posets the saturation number is bounded whilst for others it is not, and there is no structural classification that tells us the behaviour of the saturation number. Furthermore, the saturation number displays a dichotomy: it is either bounded or it grows at least as fast as $\sqrt n$. It is believed that in fact, for all posets, the saturation number is either bounded or linear.
In this talk we will discuss a certain operation which allows us to create a very general infinite class of posets with unbounded saturation number. In particular, we show that any poset can be an induced subposet of one with unbounded saturation number. This superposet can even be chosen to be a certain combination of just the original poset and any antichain of any size. We will also look at the weak version of the problem, the poset analogue of weak saturation for graphs, called the poset percolating number, and show how differently, once again, these notions are from the classical graph saturation ones.

Joint work with Sean Jaffe

<!--more-->
